***QUOTES FOR GENERATOR***
Where lusts and desires are deep, the springs of the Heavenly are shallow.
Fishes live and men die in the water. They are different in constitution, and therefore differ in their likes and dislikes. Hence it was that the ancient sages did not require (from all) the same ability, nor demand the same performances. They gave names according to the reality of what was done, and gave their approbation where it was specially suitable. This was what was called the method of universal adaptation and of sure success.
(ZHUANGZI TO HUIZI) You, Sir, have a large tree and are troubled because it is of no use - why do you not plant it in a tract where there is nothing else, or in a wide and barren wild? There you might saunter idly by its side, or in the enjoyment of untroubled ease sleep beneath it. Neither bill nor axe would shorten its existence; there would be nothing to injure it. What is there in its uselessness to cause you distress?'
When the perfect man employs his mind, it is a mirror. It conducts nothing and anticipates nothing; it responds to (what is before it), but does not retain it.
He would consider himself now (merely) as a horse, and now (merely) as an ox. His knowledge was real and untroubled by doubts; and his virtue was very true: he had not begun to proceed by what belonged to him as a man.
There is a limit to our life, but to knowledge there is no limit.
the sagely man has that in which his mind finds its enjoyment, and (looks on) wisdom as (but) the shoots from an old stump; agreements with others are to him but so much glue ; kindnesses are (but the arts of) intercourse; and great skill is (but as) merchants' wares.
(ZHUANGZI TO HUIZI) ...you, Sir, deal with your spirit as if it were something external to you, and subject your vital powers to toil. You sing (your ditties), leaning against a tree; you go to sleep, grasping the stump of a rotten dryandra tree. Heaven selected for you the bodily form (of a man), and you babble about what is strong and what is white.'
So it is that when one's virtue is extraordinary, (any deficiency in) his bodily form may be forgotten.
When I pronounce them to be good, I am not speaking of what are called benevolence and righteousness; but simply of their allowing the nature with which they are endowed to have its free course.
That which is the perfectly correct path is not to lose the real character of the nature with which we are endowed.
Vacancy, stillness, placidity, tastelessness, quietude, silence, and doing-nothing are the root of all things.
'The Dao does not exhaust itself in what is greatest, nor is it ever absent from what is least; and therefore it is to be found complete and diffused in all things. How wide is its universal comprehension! How deep is its unfathomableness!
When life comes, it cannot be declined; when it goes, it cannot be detained. Alas!
I know not how I do it, and yet I do it - that is why I say that my success is as sure as fate.
He who perceives at once the fitness, and never loses the sense of it, has the fitness that forgets all about what is fitting.
Virtue is dissipated in (the pursuit of) the name for it, and wisdom seeks to display itself in the striving with others.
All men know the advantage of being useful, but no one knows the advantage of being useless.
How is it so? It is so because it is so. How is it not so? It is not so, because it is not so. Everything has its inherent character and its proper capability.
There was a beginning previous to that beginning before there was the beginning. There was existence; there had been no existence. There was no existence before the beginning of that no existence. There was no existence previous to the no existence before there was the beginning of the no existence. If suddenly there was nonexistence, we do not know whether it was really anything existing, or really not existing. Now I have said what I have said, but I do not know whether what I have said be really anything to the point or not.